this video was sponsored by brilliant
head over to brilliant.org fim to get 20
of your premium subscription
[Applause]
if you've ever watched a racing event or
have a general interest in cars on
motorsport you probably recognize this
little guy the michelin man it is the
mascot of the french tire manufacturer
michelin the second largest tyre
manufacturer in the world they have made
tires for the bugatti veyron the famous
caterpillar dump trucks and even the
space shuttle as well as for millions of
people all over the world of course
but its logo also shows up in other
quite surprising places at the entrances
of fancy restaurants
good evening sir most people probably
know what a michelin star is and what it
represents at least in essence but not
everybody will instantly make the
connection between this michelin and
this michelin even though the name
should make this pretty obvious so how
did this happen how did a tire company
come to raid restaurants and why is this
of all things the most prestigious award
the restaurant or chef can receive
to understand this we have to go back
more than 100 years to the year 1900. it
was the beginning of the automobile boom
in france around 3 000 people owned a
car at that time and with the first cars
going into mass production it was
foreseeable that this number would rise
quickly in the next few years and
especially decades the brothers eduard
and andre michelle the owners of the
newly established tire company had
already gained attention for the
invention of a new replaceable airfield
tyre but the automobile market was still
too small to really profit from it so
they started to look for ways to promote
the continual progress of automobiles in
the country and to convince more people
to buy cars as well as to promote their
new company and product
the idea a guide for motorists
travel guides were a popular thing at
the time with a growing market for long
distance tourism there was a sudden
demand for high quality information
about far-flung places murray's handbook
for travellers and the german bedecker
guides had come out only a few decades
earlier and had been hugely successful
the michelin brothers saw a gap in the
market for a guide specifically aimed at
motorists that will provide drivers with
useful information such as maps tire
repair and replacement instructions
petrol station and car mechanics
listings as well as listings for
suitable restaurants and hotels
information that would be otherwise
difficult to find
the brothers were right and the michelin
guide became an almost instant success
which prompted them to quickly publish
the guide in other countries as well
such as belgium in 1904 nigeria and
tunisia in 1907 italy switzerland and
the netherlands in 1908
germany spain and portugal in 1910 and
ireland and the british ielts in 1911
expanding the company's reach
internationally in the early 1920s when
cars had become a lot more common the
focus of the michelin guide on tire and
car maintenance then gave way to classic
guidebook fair due to the rising
popularity of the restaurant section of
the book this section was reconstructed
and expanded
to ensure the quality of the listings
the brothers recruited a team of
so-called inspectors full-time food
critics that would travel the country
visit restaurants anonymously and review
them a practice that has remained
relatively unchanged until today
a few years later in 1926 they then made
the most important change by introducing
stars to award particularly good
restaurants
initially they only gave out single
stars but in 1931 the system was
expanded to the three star system we
know
today nearly 90 years later a new
mission and guide is still being
published every year and why its origin
as a guidebook for motorists is long
forgotten by most it has since then
become maybe the most prestigious
restaurant award in the world
but why
why is its rating so highly valued by
chefs
one reason is certainly the companies
and the guide's long history michelin
survived two world wars and many
recessions over its long 130 year
existence it now ranks among the 30
oldest companies in france
during all this time they never gave up
on their odd marketing item which meant
it quickly became one of the most
well-known travel guides in the world
one advantage the michelin guide had
over other guides particularly during
the rough first half of the 20th century
was that its profitability was never a
concern in the first 20 years the guides
were given out for free and even after
they started to charge money for it in
1920 it very likely remained
unprofitable for a long time
but because its editors could count on
the michelin marketing department
covering its costs this was never an
issue and so this art marketing expense
withstood the test of time
it also meant that they could strive for
a level of quality that other publishers
couldn't the maps for instance were some
of the best in the world they were so
well made in fact that michelin guides
were given out to british and u.s
soldiers during world war ii
then there was the fact that the company
hired dozens of full-time food critics
just to review restaurants all year
round year after year another thing that
only they could afford and clearly made
the guide stand out among the
competition
but perhaps the most important factor
was exclusivity driving in the early
20th century was very much limited to
the rich and the famous so the guide was
initially heavily geared towards this
demographic as a result the selective
standards for what to include were
notoriously strict and elitist and only
the creme de la creme of restaurants was
considered for a star
only a few dozen maybe even only handful
of restaurants were awarded stars in
each country
even after 1950 when cars were no longer
just a luxury item and the guide had
already more than 100 000 readers the
strict exclusive selection process
remained
this combination the combination of
popularity and exclusivity made the
recognition by the michelin guide a big
deal for restaurants it was a surefire
way to make your restaurant sent out
among the competition ista meant
overnight recognition and elevated the
restaurant from one in thousands to one
in a few dozen it guaranteed a surge in
new customers for the next year and more
it was simply very very good for
business which is why the stars became
very valuable and sought after honor
among restaurants and chefs
this was of course not the intentional
goal behind the guide but simply a
byproduct of its selection process and
criteria and its reputation nonetheless
it meant that the michelin guide and its
stars quickly became more consequential
for restaurants and chefs than perhaps
any other honor and it has remained like
this ever
since i know this video wasn't the type
of science video i usually do so i
thought we could end it with a little
science quiz to make up for that here's
the problem imagine you and a flock of
little birds weighing as much as you do
eat together day after day which of you
would need to eat more calories to stay
alive
did you get it
if you enjoy problem-solving exercises
like this i suggest you check out
brilliant a learning platform that uses
exercises like this to teach you
mathematics physics and computer science
the problem i just gave you was one of
the daily challenges free exercises
released each day that test your problem
solving skills and make you a little
smarter in the process you can check out
the correct answer as well as the
explanation for it with a link in the
description
these daily challenges also give you a
sneak peek into the type of content you
will find in brilliance over 60 courses
so if you're unsure whether brilliant is
something for you you can try out as
many of these as you want for free
and if you do like it you can go to
brilliant.org fym to get 20 of your
premium subscription
if you made it this far without turning
off here are a few more things that i
couldn't fit in the main part of the
video as i said in the video the way the
restaurants are reviewed is by a group
of inspectors which are essentially
full-time food critics hired by michelin
today they have around 150 of them all
over the world in the uk for instance
it's around a dozen each inspector has
between 260 to 300 lunches and dinners
during a year in the various restaurants
in the country that have stars or aspire
to receive one
restaurants with one star are usually
visited 2-3 times during a year while
the ones with 2-3 stars are visited up
to 10 times or more by multiple
inspectors
that's to ensure the restaurant has
retained the high standard necessary for
the award so restaurants can also lose
stars
one of the most notable things about
these inspectors is the secrecy in order
to make the reviewing process as
authentic as possible and to ensure the
incorruptibility of the rating the
inspectors visit the restaurants
completely anonymously and michelin goes
to extraordinary length to maintain this
anonymity all the expenses are paid for
the inspectors which in turn are not
allowed to disclose that they are
inspectors at any point while they are
working they are also not allowed to
talk to journalists and are even advised
not to tell their friends or family that
they are working for michelin this of
course means that the restaurants and
chefs never know if there's currently an
inspector among the guests which
essentially makes every day the most
important day of the year
it's like as if during the last year of
high school each day could be the day
that decides whether or not you're
allowed to go to university and you
don't know which one it will be
quite stressful
even just maintaining a star can be a
burden as losing it would have
devastating effects on the restaurant
which is why some chefs have
understandably said they didn't like
receiving a star some because of the
increased stress level and the
expectations among the customers others
because of the publicity it costs and
still others because it led to an
unmanageable jump in bookings and
affected their ability to serve their
loyal customers so while the recognition
by the guide is definitely good for
business it can also be a double-edged
sword
so that's about it don't forget to check
out brilliant and thanks for watching
so
[Music]
you